president Pizza vice president
governor
Congressman Thomas
Senator while in Congress Mandela Bell
sinus sting which gas at ladies and gentlemen, I appreciate you your president having made me an honorary visiting professor and I will assure you that my first light you will be a very brief. I am delighted to be here and I'm particularly delighted to be here on this occasion.
We meet at a college.
noted for knowledge
They said he noted for progress in a state noted for strength and we stand in need of all three.
We meet in an hour of change and challenge.
In a decade of Hope and fear in an age of both knowledge and ignorance the greater our knowledge increases the greater our ignorance unfolds.
Despite the Striking fact that most of the scientists that the world has ever known are alive and working today.
Despite the fact that this nation's own scientific Manpower is doubling every 12 years in a rate of growth more than three times that of our population as a whole.
The vast stretches of the unknown and the unanswered and the unfinished still far outstrip. I collected comprehension.
No, man can fully grasp. How far and how fast we have come.
What can dance if you will the 50,000 years of man's recorded history in a time span of about a half a century?
Jaden and these terms we know very little about the first 40 years except at the end of them Advance man had learned to use the skins of animals that come in them.
Then about 10 years ago under this standed man emerged from his caves to construct other kinds of Sheldon.
Only 5 years ago man learned to write and use a cart with wheels.
Christianity began less than two years ago. The printing press came this year and then less than two months ago.
During this whole 50 year span of human history the steam engine provided a new source of Paula Newton explore the meaning of gravity last month electric lights and telephones and Automobiles and airplanes became available only last week. We developed penicillin and television and nuclear power. And now it's America's new spacecraft succeed in reaching Venus. We will have literally reach the Stars before midnight tonight.
This is a breathtaking pace and such a pace cannot help but create new Wheels as it dispels old new ignorant. No problems new dangers Shirley the opening distance of space.
Promise high cost and hardships as well as high reward. So it is not surprising that some would have us stay where we are a little longer the rest the weight bought this city of Houston this state of Texas. This country of the United States was not built by those awaiting and rested and wish to look behind them.
I know she'll move forward and so will space.
William Bradford
speaking in 1630 of the founding of the Plymouth Bay Colony
said that all great and honorable actions are accompanied with great difficulties and both must be and apprised and overcome with answerable courage if this capsule history of our progress teaches us everything it is that man and his quest for knowledge and progress is determined and cannot be deterred the exploration of space will go ahead with a We join in it or not.
And it is one of the Great Adventures of all time and no Nation.
Which expects to be the leader of other nations can expect to stay behind in this race for space made certain that this country road the first waves of the Industrial Revolution the first waves of modern invention and the first wave of nuclear power and this generation does not intend to founder in the backwash of the coming age of space. We mean to be a part of it we mean delete it.
all the eyes of the world
now look into space to the moon and the planets Beyond and we have vowed that we shall not see it coming by a hospital flag of conquest by a banner of freedom and peace. We have borrowed that we shall not see space filled with weapons of mass destruction, but with instruments of knowledge and understanding yet the vows of this nation can only be fulfilled if we in this nation offer and therefore we intend to be first.
And Sean are leadership in Science and Industry our hopes for peace and security are obligations to ourselves as well as others all require us to make this effort to solve these Mysteries the solvent for the good of all men and to become the world's leading space-faring Nation.
We set sail on this new sea because there is new knowledge to be gained and new rides to be one and they must be one and used for the progress of all people for space science like nuclear science and all technology has no conscience of its own.
Whether it will become a Force for good or ill depends on man and only if United States occupies a position of preeminence.
Can we help the side?
Whether this new ocean will be a see your piece or a new terrifying theater of war.
I do not say that we should or will go unprotected against the hostel misuse of space anymore than we go in protected against the Hostile use of land or sea, but I do say that space can be explored and master without feeding the fires of War without repeating the mistakes that man is made and extending his rent around this love of ours. There is no stripe. No Prejudice. No National conflict in outer space as yet.
It hasn't the hospital to us. All its Conquest deserves the best of all mankind and it's opportunity for peaceful cooperation may never come again.
But why some say the Moon?
Why choose this as I'll go and they may well ask why climb the highest mountain five 35 years ago fly the Atlantic. Why does Rice play Texas we choose to go to the Moon we choose to go to the Moon?
We choose to go to the moon in this decade and do the other things not because they are easy, but because they are hard because that goal will serve to organize and measure the best of our energies and skills because that challenges one that we're willing to accept one. We are willing to postpone and one we intend to win and the others to
It is for these reasons that I regard the decision last year the shift our efforts in space from low to high gear as among the most important decision that will be made during my incumbency in the office of the presidency in the last 24 hours. We have seen facilities now being created for the greatest and most complex exploration in man's history. We have felt the ground shake and the are Shattered by the testing of a Saturn SC1 booster rocket many times as tall as the atlas which launched John Glenn.
Generating power equivalent to 10000 automobiles with their accelerator on the floor. We have seen the site where V F-1 rocket engine each one as powerful as all eight engines of the Saturn combine will be clustered together to make the advanced Saturn missile assembly in a new building to be built at Cape Canaveral as tall as a 48 story structure as wide as a city block and as long as two legs of this field,
Within These last 19 months at least 45 satellite that circle the Earth some 40 of them were made in the United States of America and they were far more sophisticated and supplied far more knowledge to the people of the world than those of the Soviet Union the Mariner spacecraft.
The Mariner spacecraft now on its way to Venus is the most intricate instrument in the history of Space Science. The accuracy of that shot is comprable to firing a missile from Cape Canaveral and dropping it in this Stadium between the 40-yard lines.
Transit satellites are helping our ships at Sea to steer a safer course Tyra satellites have given us unprecedented warnings of hurricanes and storms and will do the same for forest fires and Iceberg we have had off their you even if they do not admit them and they may be less public to be sure.
You'll be sure we are behind and we'll be behind for some time in man flight, but we do not intend to stay behind and in this decade we shall make up and move ahead.
The growth of our science and education will be enriched by new knowledge of our universe and environment by new techniques of learning and mapping and observation buy new tools and computers for industry medicine the whole as well as the school technical institution such as rice will reap the Harvest of these games and finally the spaceship in itself while still in its infancy has already created a great number of new companies and tens and thousands of new jobs space and related Industries are generating new demand an investment and skilled personnel and this city and this state and this region will share greatly in this room.
What was once the farthest outpost on the old Frontier of the West will be the farthest outpost on the New Frontier of Science and Space Houston?
Your city of Houston when it's manned spacecraft satta will become the hot of a large scientific and engineering community during the next five years the National Aeronautics and Space Administration expects to double the number of scientists and engineers in this area to increase its outlays for salaries and expenses the 60 million dollars a year to invest some two hundred million dollars in plan and laboratory facilities and to direct their contract a new space. If it's over 1 billion dollars from this setup in this city to be sure all this process all a good deal of money. This year's space budget is 3 times what it was in January 1961.
And it is greater than the space budget of the previous eight years combined that budget now stands at 5400000000 dollars a year a staggering sum know someone less than we pay for cigarettes and cigars every year space expenditures.
Thanks expenditures will soon rise Samoa from $0.40 per person for a week to more than $0.50 a week for every man woman and child in the United States fall. We have given this program a high National priority.
Even though I realize that this is in some measure and active faith and vision for we do not now know what benefits await us.
But if I were to say my fellow citizens we shall send you the moon 240,000 miles away from the control station in Houston a giant rocket more than 300 ft tall the length of this football field made of new metal alloys some of which have not yet been invented capable of standing heat and stress has several times more than ever been experienced fitted together with a Precision better than the finest watch.
Caring all the equipment needed for propulsion guidance control Communications food and survival on an untried mission to an unknown Celestial body and then return it safely to we're re-entering the atmosphere at speeds of over 25,000 miles per hour causing heat about her almost as hot as it is here today and do all this and do all this and do it right and do it first before the spectators off then we must be bald.
I'm the one who's doing all the work. So well get bison stay cool for a minute.
However, I think we're going to do it and I think that the we must pay what needs to be paid. I don't think we ought to waste any money, but I think we ought to do the job and this will be done in a decade of the sixth. It may be done while some of you were still here at school at this college and university. It will be done during the terms of office of some of the people who sit here on this last one, but it will be done and it will be done before the end of the second and I am delighted that this University is playing a part and putting a man on the moon as part of a great National effort of the United States of America.
Many years ago the Great British Explorer George Mallory who wants to die on Mount Everest was asked. Why did he want to climb it? He said because it is there a space is beta and we're going to climate and the moon and the planets today and new hopes for knowledge and peace are there and that far as we set sail we ask God's blessing on the most hazardous and dangerous and Greatest Adventure on which man has ever involved.
